# Exam AI-102: Designing and Implementing a Microsoft Azure AI Solution.

- Define artificial intelligence
- Understand AI-related terms
- Understand considerations for AI Engineers
- Understand considerations for responsible AI
- Understand capabilities of Azure Machine Learning
- Understand capabilities of Azure Cognitive Services
- Understand capabilities of the Azure Bot Service
- Understand capabilities of Azure Cognitive Search

Visual perception - The ability to use computer vision capabilities to accept, interpret, and process input from images, video streams, and live cameras.

Text analysis - The ability to use natural language processing (NLP) to not only "read", but also extract semantic meaning from text-based data.

Speech - The ability to recognize speech as input and synthesize spoken output. The combination of speech capabilities together with the ability to apply NLP analysis of text enables a form of human-compute interaction that's become known as conversational AI, in which users can interact with AI agents (usually referred to as bots) in much the same way they would with another human.

Decision making - The ability to use past experience and learned correlations to assess situations and take appropriate actions. For example, recognizing anomalies in sensor readings and taking automated action to prevent failure or system damage.

- Data science :
Data science is a discipline that focuses on the processing and analysis of data; applying statistical techniques to uncover and visualize relationships and patterns in the data, and defining experimental models that help explore those patterns.

- Machine learning :
Machine learning is a subset of data science that deals with the training and validation of predictive models. Typically, a data scientist prepares the data and then uses it to train a model based on an algorithm that exploits the relationships between the features in the data to predict values for unknown labels.

- Artificial intelligence :
Artificial intelligence usually (but not always) builds on machine learning to create software that emulates one or more characteristics of human intelligence.
