JAVA/NotesFromReading/ch_1.md, before:

# Java Building Blocks

The package java.lang is imported into every Java class.

A valid .java file may define any number of classes or interfaces but have at most one public class.

Java is object oriented, not procedural

Operator overloading is permitted in languages like C++, not Java

the JVM manages the location of objects in memory that can change and is transparent to the Java application.

local variables defined within methods cannot have access modifiers such as public/private.

Object-oriented programming is the technique of structuring data into objects, which may contain data and a set of actions that operate on the data.

Garbage collection can happen at any time while an application is running, especially if the available memory suddenly becomes low.

Java does not allow declaring different types as part of the same declaration. ex :- double num1, int num2 = 0;

A byte is smaller than a char.

The instance variables, constructor, and method names can appear in any order within a class declaration.

The finalize() method may not be called, such as if your program crashes. However, it is guaranteed to be called no more than once.

byte and short do not store values with decimal points.

Integer is the name of a class in Java. While it is bad practice to use the name of a class as your local variable name, this is legal. ex:- int Integer = 0;

It is not legal to use a reserved word as a variable name. All of the primitives including int are reserved words. ex:- Integer int = 0;(does not compile).

Instance variable of type int, long, and short are initialised to zero.

The wrapper class for int is **Integer** and the wrapper class for char is **Character**. All other primitives have the same name as of primitive.

Underscores are allowed between any two digits in a numeric literal. Underscores are not allowed adjacent to a decimal point.

The parseInt() methods return a primitive. The valueOf() methods return a wrapper class object.

Remember that garbage collection is not guaranteed to run on demand. It may doesn’t run at all.

Java does not automatically convert integers to boolean values for use in if-then statements.

Ternary operations require both right-hand expressions to be of compatible data types.

The & and && (AND) operators are not interchangeable, as the conjunctive & operator always evaluates both sides of the expression, while the conditional conjunctive && operator only evaluates the right-hand side of the expression if the left side is determined to be true. This is why conditional operators are often referred to as short-circuit operators, skipping the right-hand side expression at runtime.

The XOR ^ operator evaluates to true if p and q differ and false if they are the same, for (p ^ q).

The value of a case statement must be constant, a literal value, or final variable.

Barring any JVM limitations, a switch statement can have any number of case statements (including none) but at most one default statement.

Shorter strings sort before longer strings when all the other characters are the same, making Option B the answer.

When using an array initializer, you are not allowed to specify the size separately. The size is inferred from the number of elements listed.

Three dots in a row is a varargs parameter. While varargs is used like an array from within the method, **it can only be used as a method parameter**.

Arrays are indexed using numbers, not strings

Sorting an empty array is valid and results in an empty array. Java requires having a sorted array before calling binarySearch(). You do not have to call Arrays.sort to perform the sort though. Array can be already sorted.

## Using loop constructs

The continue keyword is used to end the loop iteration immediately and resume execution at the next iteration.

for (segmentA; segmentB; segmentC) {}. A for loop is allowed to have all three segments left blank.

It is not possible to create an infinite loop using a for-each because it simply loops through an array or ArrayList.

The for-each loop uses a variable and colon as the syntax. eg - for (String f : fun) System.out.println(f);

## Practice Questions before exam

- Given the following application, fill in the missing values in the table starting from the top and going downward.
    ```java
        package competition;
        public class Robot {
        static String weight = "A lot";
        /* default */ double ageMonths = 5, ageDays = 2;
        private static boolean success = true;
        public void main(String[] args) {
            final String retries = "1";
            // P1
        }
    }
    ```
    | Variable | Type Number of Variables Accessible at P1 |
    | --- | --- |
    | Class | _______ |
    | Instance | _______ |
    | Local | _______ |

    > ANS: 2, 2, 1

- What is the result of compiling and executing the following class?
    ```java
        public class ParkRanger {
        int birds = 10;
        public static void main(String[] data) {
           int trees = 5;
           System.out.print(trees+birds);
        }
    }
    ```
  - options:
    - It does not compile.
    - It compiles but throws an exception at runtime.
    - It compiles and outputs 5.
    - It compiles and outputs 15
- example of: local scope overrides instance scope
    ```Java
        package sports;
        public class Bicycle {
            String color = "red";
            private void printColor(String color) {
                color = "purple";
                System.out.print(color);
            }
            public static void main(String[] rider) {
                new Bicycle().printColor("blue");
            }
        }
    ```
- Which is the first line to trigger a compiler error?
    ```java
        double d1 = 5f;    // p1
        double d2 = 5.0;   // p2
        float f1 = 5f;     // p3
        float f2 = 5.0;    // p4
    ```
- Which of the following can fill in the blanks to make this code compile?
    ```java
         ______ d = new ______ (1_000_000_.00);
    ```
  - Options:
    - double,
    - doubledouble,
    - DoubleDouble,
    - double
    - None of the above

- Of the types double, int, long, and short, how many could fill in the blank to have this code output 0?
    ```java
        static  _______defaultValue;
        public static void main(String[] args) {
            System.out.println(defaultValue);
        }
    ```
  - Options:
    - One
    - Two
    - Three
    - Four
- What is the output of the following application?
    ```java
        package voting;
        public class Election {
        public void calculateResult(Integer candidateA, Integer candidateB) {
            boolean process = candidateA == null || candidateA.intValue() < 10;
            boolean value = candidateA && candidateB;
            System.out.print(process || value);
        }
        public static void main(String[] unused) {
            new Election().calculateResult(null,203);
        }
      }
    ```
  - Options:
    - true
    - false
    - The code does not compile.
    - The code compiles but throws a NullPointerException on line 3 at runtime.
- What is the output of the following application?
    ```java
        package schedule;
        public class PrintWeek {
            public static final void main(String[] days) {
                System.out.print(5 + 6 + "7" + 8 + 9);
            }
        }
    ```
- For a given non-null String myTestVariable, what is the resulting value of executing the statement myTestVariable.equals(null)?
  - Options:
    - true
    - false
    - The statement does not compile.
    - The statement compiles but will produce an exception when used at runtime.
- What is the value of 12 + 6 * 3 % (1 + 1) in Java?
- What is the result of running the following program?
    ```java
        package fun;
        public class Sudoku {
            static int[][] game = new int[6][6];
            public static void main(String[] args) {
                game[3][3] = 6;
                Object[] obj = game;
                obj[3] = "X";
                System.out.println(game[3][3]);
            }
        }
    ```
    - Options:
      - X
      - The code does not compile.
      - The code compiles but throws a NullPointerException at runtime.
      - The code compiles but throws a different exception at runtime.
- What does the following output?
    ```java
        String[] os = new String[] { "Mac", "Linux", "Windows" };
        Arrays.sort(os);
        System.out.println(Arrays.binarySearch(os, "RedHat"));
    ```
- How many dimensions does the array reference moreBools allow?
    ```java
        boolean[][] bools[], moreBools;
    ```
- What is the result of the following when called as java counting.Binary?
    ```java
    package counting;
    import java.util.*;
    public class Binary {
        public static void main(String... args) {
            Arrays.sort(args);
            System.out.println(Arrays.toString(args));
        }
    }
    ```
  - Options:
    - null[]
    - The code does not compile.
    - The code compiles but throws an exception at runtime.
    - What does the following output?
- Which of the following statements are true?
    - You can always change a method signature from call(String[] arg) to call(String... arg) without causing a compiler error in     the  calling code.
    - You can always change a method signature from call(String... arg) to call(String[] arg) without causing a compiler error in     the  existing code.
    > Ans: From within a method, an array parameter and a varargs parameter are treated the same. From the caller, an array parameter is more restrictive. Both types can receive an array. However, only a varargs parameter is allowed to automatically turn individual parameters into an array. Therefore, statement I is correct

Commit message:

Java - done with loop constructs

JAVA/NotesFromReading/ch_1.md, after:

# Java Building Blocks

The package java.lang is imported into every Java class.

A valid .java file may define any number of classes or interfaces but have at most one public class.

Java is object oriented, not procedural

Operator overloading is permitted in languages like C++, not Java

the JVM manages the location of objects in memory that can change and is transparent to the Java application.

local variables defined within methods cannot have access modifiers such as public/private.

Object-oriented programming is the technique of structuring data into objects, which may contain data and a set of actions that operate on the data.

Garbage collection can happen at any time while an application is running, especially if the available memory suddenly becomes low.

Java does not allow declaring different types as part of the same declaration. ex :- double num1, int num2 = 0;

A byte is smaller than a char.

The instance variables, constructor, and method names can appear in any order within a class declaration.

The finalize() method may not be called, such as if your program crashes. However, it is guaranteed to be called no more than once.

byte and short do not store values with decimal points.

Integer is the name of a class in Java. While it is bad practice to use the name of a class as your local variable name, this is legal. ex:- int Integer = 0;

It is not legal to use a reserved word as a variable name. All of the primitives including int are reserved words. ex:- Integer int = 0;(does not compile).

Instance variable of type int, long, and short are initialised to zero.

The wrapper class for int is **Integer** and the wrapper class for char is **Character**. All other primitives have the same name as of primitive.

Underscores are allowed between any two digits in a numeric literal. Underscores are not allowed adjacent to a decimal point.

The parseInt() methods return a primitive. The valueOf() methods return a wrapper class object.

Remember that garbage collection is not guaranteed to run on demand. It may doesn’t run at all.

Java does not automatically convert integers to boolean values for use in if-then statements.

Ternary operations require both right-hand expressions to be of compatible data types.

The & and && (AND) operators are not interchangeable, as the conjunctive & operator always evaluates both sides of the expression, while the conditional conjunctive && operator only evaluates the right-hand side of the expression if the left side is determined to be true. This is why conditional operators are often referred to as short-circuit operators, skipping the right-hand side expression at runtime.

The XOR ^ operator evaluates to true if p and q differ and false if they are the same, for (p ^ q).

The value of a case statement must be constant, a literal value, or final variable.

Barring any JVM limitations, a switch statement can have any number of case statements (including none) but at most one default statement.

Shorter strings sort before longer strings when all the other characters are the same, making Option B the answer.

When using an array initializer, you are not allowed to specify the size separately. The size is inferred from the number of elements listed.

Three dots in a row is a varargs parameter. While varargs is used like an array from within the method, **it can only be used as a method parameter**.

Arrays are indexed using numbers, not strings

Sorting an empty array is valid and results in an empty array. Java requires having a sorted array before calling binarySearch(). You do not have to call Arrays.sort to perform the sort though. Array can be already sorted.

## Using loop constructs

The continue keyword is used to end the loop iteration immediately and resume execution at the next iteration.

for (segmentA; segmentB; segmentC) {}. A for loop is allowed to have all three segments left blank.

It is not possible to create an infinite loop using a for-each because it simply loops through an array or ArrayList.

The for-each loop uses a variable and colon as the syntax. eg - for (String f : fun) System.out.println(f);

Java reserved keywords cannot be used as labels in looping constructs.

## Practice Questions before exam

- Given the following application, fill in the missing values in the table starting from the top and going downward.
    ```java
        package competition;
        public class Robot {
        static String weight = "A lot";
        /* default */ double ageMonths = 5, ageDays = 2;
        private static boolean success = true;
        public void main(String[] args) {
            final String retries = "1";
            // P1
        }
    }
    ```
    | Variable | Type Number of Variables Accessible at P1 |
    | --- | --- |
    | Class | _______ |
    | Instance | _______ |
    | Local | _______ |

    > ANS: 2, 2, 1

- What is the result of compiling and executing the following class?
    ```java
        public class ParkRanger {
        int birds = 10;
        public static void main(String[] data) {
           int trees = 5;
           System.out.print(trees+birds);
        }
    }
    ```
  - options:
    - It does not compile.
    - It compiles but throws an exception at runtime.
    - It compiles and outputs 5.
    - It compiles and outputs 15
- example of: local scope overrides instance scope
    ```Java
        package sports;
        public class Bicycle {
            String color = "red";
            private void printColor(String color) {
                color = "purple";
                System.out.print(color);
            }
            public static void main(String[] rider) {
                new Bicycle().printColor("blue");
            }
        }
    ```
- Which is the first line to trigger a compiler error?
    ```java
        double d1 = 5f;    // p1
        double d2 = 5.0;   // p2
        float f1 = 5f;     // p3
        float f2 = 5.0;    // p4
    ```
- Which of the following can fill in the blanks to make this code compile?
    ```java
         ______ d = new ______ (1_000_000_.00);
    ```
  - Options:
    - double,
    - doubledouble,
    - DoubleDouble,
    - double
    - None of the above

- Of the types double, int, long, and short, how many could fill in the blank to have this code output 0?
    ```java
        static  _______defaultValue;
        public static void main(String[] args) {
            System.out.println(defaultValue);
        }
    ```
  - Options:
    - One
    - Two
    - Three
    - Four
- What is the output of the following application?
    ```java
        package voting;
        public class Election {
        public void calculateResult(Integer candidateA, Integer candidateB) {
            boolean process = candidateA == null || candidateA.intValue() < 10;
            boolean value = candidateA && candidateB;
            System.out.print(process || value);
        }
        public static void main(String[] unused) {
            new Election().calculateResult(null,203);
        }
      }
    ```
  - Options:
    - true
    - false
    - The code does not compile.
    - The code compiles but throws a NullPointerException on line 3 at runtime.
- What is the output of the following application?
    ```java
        package schedule;
        public class PrintWeek {
            public static final void main(String[] days) {
                System.out.print(5 + 6 + "7" + 8 + 9);
            }
        }
    ```
- For a given non-null String myTestVariable, what is the resulting value of executing the statement myTestVariable.equals(null)?
  - Options:
    - true
    - false
    - The statement does not compile.
    - The statement compiles but will produce an exception when used at runtime.
- What is the value of 12 + 6 * 3 % (1 + 1) in Java?
- What is the result of running the following program?
    ```java
        package fun;
        public class Sudoku {
            static int[][] game = new int[6][6];
            public static void main(String[] args) {
                game[3][3] = 6;
                Object[] obj = game;
                obj[3] = "X";
                System.out.println(game[3][3]);
            }
        }
    ```
    - Options:
      - X
      - The code does not compile.
      - The code compiles but throws a NullPointerException at runtime.
      - The code compiles but throws a different exception at runtime.
- What does the following output?
    ```java
        String[] os = new String[] { "Mac", "Linux", "Windows" };
        Arrays.sort(os);
        System.out.println(Arrays.binarySearch(os, "RedHat"));
    ```
- How many dimensions does the array reference moreBools allow?
    ```java
        boolean[][] bools[], moreBools;
    ```
- What is the result of the following when called as java counting.Binary?
    ```java
    package counting;
    import java.util.*;
    public class Binary {
        public static void main(String... args) {
            Arrays.sort(args);
            System.out.println(Arrays.toString(args));
        }
    }
    ```
  - Options:
    - null[]
    - The code does not compile.
    - The code compiles but throws an exception at runtime.
    - What does the following output?
- Which of the following statements are true?
    - You can always change a method signature from call(String[] arg) to call(String... arg) without causing a compiler error in     the  calling code.
    - You can always change a method signature from call(String... arg) to call(String[] arg) without causing a compiler error in     the  existing code.
    > Ans: From within a method, an array parameter and a varargs parameter are treated the same. From the caller, an array parameter is more restrictive. Both types can receive an array. However, only a varargs parameter is allowed to automatically turn individual parameters into an array. Therefore, statement I is correct
