PySpark study/Notes.md, before:

# What is Spark

Spark is a platform for cluster computing. Spark lets you spread data and computations over clusters with multiple nodes (think of each node as a separate computer). Splitting up your data makes it easier to work with very large datasets because each node only works with a small amount of data.

As each node works on its own subset of the total data, it also carries out a part of the total calculations required, so that both data processing and computation are performed in parallel over the nodes in the cluster. It is a fact that parallel computation can make certain types of programming tasks much faster.

However, with greater computing power comes greater complexity.

Deciding whether or not Spark is the best solution for your problem takes some experience, but you can consider questions like:

Is my data too big to work with on a single machine?
Can my calculations be easily parallelized?

The first step in using Spark is connecting to a cluster.

In practice, the cluster will be hosted on a remote machine that's connected to all other nodes. There will be one computer, called the master that manages splitting up the data and the computations. The master is connected to the rest of the computers in the cluster, which are called slaves. The master sends the slaves data and calculations to run, and they send their results back to the master.

When you're just getting started with Spark it's simpler to just run a cluster locally. Thus, for this course, instead of connecting to another computer, all computations will be run on DataCamp's servers in a simulated cluster.

Creating the connection is as simple as creating an instance of the SparkContext class. The class constructor takes a few optional arguments that allow you to specify the attributes of the cluster you're connecting to.

An object holding all these attributes can be created with the SparkConf() constructor. Take a look at the [documentation](http://spark.apache.org/docs/2.1.0/api/python/pyspark.html) for all the details!

Using DataFrames
Spark's core data structure is the Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD). This is a low level object that lets Spark work its magic by splitting data across multiple nodes in the cluster. However, RDDs are hard to work with directly, so in this course you'll be using the Spark DataFrame abstraction built on top of RDDs.

The Spark DataFrame was designed to behave a lot like a SQL table (a table with variables in the columns and observations in the rows). Not only are they easier to understand, DataFrames are also more optimized for complicated operations than RDDs.

When you start modifying and combining columns and rows of data, there are many ways to arrive at the same result, but some often take much longer than others. When using RDDs, it's up to the data scientist to figure out the right way to optimize the query, but the DataFrame implementation has much of this optimization built in!

To start working with Spark DataFrames, you first have to create a SparkSession object from your SparkContext. You can think of the SparkContext as your connection to the cluster and the SparkSession as your interface with that connection.

[Temporary table concept](https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.datacamp.com/production/course_4452/datasets/spark_figure.png)

## Manipulating data

Spark DataFrame is immutable.This means that it can't be changed, and so columns can't be updated in place.

The difference between .select() and .withColumn() methods is that .select() returns only the columns you specify, while .withColumn() returns all the columns of the DataFrame in addition to the one you defined.

selecting transforming and aliasing
Aliasing : flights.select((flights.air_time/60).alias("duration_hrs"))
OR
The equivalent Spark DataFrame method .selectExpr() takes SQL expressions as a string: flights.selectExpr("air_time/60 as duration_hrs")

OR
flights.selectExpr("air_time/60 as duration_hrs")
as keyword being equivalent to the .alias() method. To select multiple columns, you can pass multiple strings.

### Aggregating

All of the common aggregation methods, like .min(), .max(), and .count() are GroupedData methods.
eg. df.groupBy().min("col").show()
This creates a GroupedData object (so you can use the .min() method), then finds the minimum value in col, and returns it as a DataFrame.

### Grouping and Aggregating I

Part of what makes aggregating so powerful is the addition of groups. PySpark has a whole class devoted to grouped data frames: pyspark.sql.GroupedData .

### Joining

In PySpark, joins are performed using the DataFrame method .join(). This method takes three arguments. The first is the second DataFrame that you want to join with the first one. The second argument, on, is the name of the key column(s) as a string. The names of the key column(s) must be the same in each table. The third argument, how, specifies the kind of join to perform.

### Machine Learning Pipelines

At the core of the pyspark.ml module are the Transformer and Estimator classes. Almost every other class in the module behaves similarly to these two basic classes.

Transformer classes have a .transform() method that takes a DataFrame and returns a new DataFrame; usually the original one with a new column appended.

For example, you might use the class Bucketizer to create discrete bins from a continuous feature or the class PCA to reduce the dimensionality of your dataset using principal component analysis.

Estimator classes all implement a .fit() method. These methods also take a DataFrame, but instead of returning another DataFrame they return a model object.

This can be something like a StringIndexerModel for including categorical data saved as strings in your models, or a RandomForestModel that uses the random forest algorithm for classification or regression.

Commit message:

pyspark - started with machine learning pipelines

PySpark study/Notes.md, after:

# What is Spark

Spark is a platform for cluster computing. Spark lets you spread data and computations over clusters with multiple nodes (think of each node as a separate computer). Splitting up your data makes it easier to work with very large datasets because each node only works with a small amount of data.

As each node works on its own subset of the total data, it also carries out a part of the total calculations required, so that both data processing and computation are performed in parallel over the nodes in the cluster. It is a fact that parallel computation can make certain types of programming tasks much faster.

However, with greater computing power comes greater complexity.

Deciding whether or not Spark is the best solution for your problem takes some experience, but you can consider questions like:

Is my data too big to work with on a single machine?
Can my calculations be easily parallelized?

The first step in using Spark is connecting to a cluster.

In practice, the cluster will be hosted on a remote machine that's connected to all other nodes. There will be one computer, called the master that manages splitting up the data and the computations. The master is connected to the rest of the computers in the cluster, which are called slaves. The master sends the slaves data and calculations to run, and they send their results back to the master.

When you're just getting started with Spark it's simpler to just run a cluster locally. Thus, for this course, instead of connecting to another computer, all computations will be run on DataCamp's servers in a simulated cluster.

Creating the connection is as simple as creating an instance of the SparkContext class. The class constructor takes a few optional arguments that allow you to specify the attributes of the cluster you're connecting to.

An object holding all these attributes can be created with the SparkConf() constructor. Take a look at the [documentation](http://spark.apache.org/docs/2.1.0/api/python/pyspark.html) for all the details!

Using DataFrames
Spark's core data structure is the Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD). This is a low level object that lets Spark work its magic by splitting data across multiple nodes in the cluster. However, RDDs are hard to work with directly, so in this course you'll be using the Spark DataFrame abstraction built on top of RDDs.

The Spark DataFrame was designed to behave a lot like a SQL table (a table with variables in the columns and observations in the rows). Not only are they easier to understand, DataFrames are also more optimized for complicated operations than RDDs.

When you start modifying and combining columns and rows of data, there are many ways to arrive at the same result, but some often take much longer than others. When using RDDs, it's up to the data scientist to figure out the right way to optimize the query, but the DataFrame implementation has much of this optimization built in!

To start working with Spark DataFrames, you first have to create a SparkSession object from your SparkContext. You can think of the SparkContext as your connection to the cluster and the SparkSession as your interface with that connection.

[Temporary table concept](https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.datacamp.com/production/course_4452/datasets/spark_figure.png)

## Manipulating data

Spark DataFrame is immutable.This means that it can't be changed, and so columns can't be updated in place.

The difference between .select() and .withColumn() methods is that .select() returns only the columns you specify, while .withColumn() returns all the columns of the DataFrame in addition to the one you defined.

selecting transforming and aliasing
Aliasing : flights.select((flights.air_time/60).alias("duration_hrs"))
OR
The equivalent Spark DataFrame method .selectExpr() takes SQL expressions as a string: flights.selectExpr("air_time/60 as duration_hrs")

OR
flights.selectExpr("air_time/60 as duration_hrs")
as keyword being equivalent to the .alias() method. To select multiple columns, you can pass multiple strings.

### Aggregating

All of the common aggregation methods, like .min(), .max(), and .count() are GroupedData methods.
eg. df.groupBy().min("col").show()
This creates a GroupedData object (so you can use the .min() method), then finds the minimum value in col, and returns it as a DataFrame.

### Grouping and Aggregating I

Part of what makes aggregating so powerful is the addition of groups. PySpark has a whole class devoted to grouped data frames: pyspark.sql.GroupedData .

### Joining

In PySpark, joins are performed using the DataFrame method .join(). This method takes three arguments. The first is the second DataFrame that you want to join with the first one. The second argument, on, is the name of the key column(s) as a string. The names of the key column(s) must be the same in each table. The third argument, how, specifies the kind of join to perform.

## Machine Learning Pipelines

At the core of the pyspark.ml module are the Transformer and Estimator classes. Almost every other class in the module behaves similarly to these two basic classes.

Transformer classes have a .transform() method that takes a DataFrame and returns a new DataFrame; usually the original one with a new column appended.

For example, you might use the class Bucketizer to create discrete bins from a continuous feature or the class PCA to reduce the dimensionality of your dataset using principal component analysis.

Estimator classes all implement a .fit() method. These methods also take a DataFrame, but instead of returning another DataFrame they return a model object.

This can be something like a StringIndexerModel for including categorical data saved as strings in your models, or a RandomForestModel that uses the random forest algorithm for classification or regression.

### Data types

it's important to know that Spark only handles numeric data. That means all of the columns in your DataFrame must be either integers or decimals (called 'doubles' in Spark).

When we imported our data, we let Spark guess what kind of information each column held. Unfortunately, Spark doesn't always guess right and you can see that some of the columns in our DataFrame are strings containing numbers as opposed to actual numeric values.

To remedy this, you can use the .cast() method in combination with the .withColumn() method. It's important to note that .cast() works on columns, while .withColumn() works on DataFrames.

The only argument you need to pass to .cast() is the kind of value you want to create, in string form. For example, to create integers, you'll pass the argument "integer" and for decimal numbers you'll use "double".

label ( is the default name for the *response variable* in Spark's machine learning routines).
